Final pass and conclusion (#51)
adrhill/iclr2025-sparse-autodiff: _posts/2025-04-28-sparse-autodiff.md

$$ \Jfc = \Jhc \cdot \Jgc .$$

Figure 1 illustrates this for $n=5$, $m=4$ and $p=3$.

> We will keep using these dimensions in following illustrations, even though the real benefits of ASD only appear for large matrices.

Author: ```suggestion
We will keep using these dimensions in following illustrations, even though the real benefits of ASD only appear as the dimension grows.
```

> We will keep using these dimensions in following illustrations, even though the real benefits of ASD only appear for large matrices.

Author: let's go back to the initial formulation

<aside class="l-body box-note" markdown="1">
We visualize "matrix entries" in linear maps to build intuition.
Even though following illustrations will sometimes put numbers onto these entries,
linear maps are best thought of as black-box operators.
</aside>

### Forward-mode AD

> Now that we have translated the compositional structure of our function $f$ into a compositional structure of linear maps, we can evaluate them by propagating vectors through them, one layer at a time.

Author: yes but I want to keep the word "operator" for linear operators, as explained
```suggestion
Now that we have translated the compositional structure of our function $f$ into a compositional structure of linear maps, we can evaluate them by propagating vectors through them, one subfunction at a time.
```

the JVP of our composed function $f$.

**Note that we did not compute intermediate Jacobian matrices at any point** – we only propagated vectors through linear maps.

### Reverse-mode AD

We can also propagate vectors through our linear maps from the left-hand side, 
resulting in **reverse-mode AD**, shown in Figure 5.

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/2025-04-28-sparse-autodiff/reverse_mode_eval.svg" class="img-fluid" %}
<div class="caption">
    Figure 5: Evaluating linear maps in reverse mode.
</div>

This is commonly called a **vector-Jacobian product** (VJP) or **pullback**.
Just like forward mode, reverse mode is also matrix-free: **no intermediate Jacobians are computed at any point**.

### From linear maps back to Jacobians

The linear map formulation allows us to avoid intermediate Jacobian matrices in long chains of function compositions.

> But can we use this machinery to recover the Jacobian of the composition $f$ itself?

Author: ```suggestion
But can we use this machinery to compute the Jacobian of the composition $f$ itself?
```

> But can we use this machinery to recover the Jacobian of the composition $f$ itself?

Author: ```suggestion
But can we use this machinery to materialize the Jacobian of the composition $f$ itself?
```

When functions have many inputs and many outputs,
a given output does not always depend on every single input.
This endows the corresponding Jacobian with a **sparsity pattern**,
where **zero coefficients denote an absence of (first-order) dependency**.
The previous case of a convolutional layer is a simple example.
An even simpler example is an activation function applied elementwise,
for which the Jacobian is the identity matrix.

### Leveraging sparsity

For now, we assume that the sparsity pattern of the Jacobian is always the same, regardless of the input, and that we know it ahead of time.
We say that two columns or rows of the Jacobian matrix are **structurally orthogonal** if, for every index, at most one of them has a nonzero coefficient.
In other words, the sparsity patterns of the columns are non-overlapping vectors,
whose dot product is always zero regardless of their actual values.

> The core idea of ASD is that **we can compute structurally orthogonal columns (or rows) with a single JVP (or VJP).**

Author: ```suggestion
The core idea of ASD is that **we can compute multiple structurally orthogonal columns (or rows) with a single JVP (or VJP).**
```

    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 11: Computing a Jacobian with reverse-mode ASD: (a) compressed evaluation of orthogonal rows (b) decompression to Jacobian matrix
</div>

### Pattern detection and coloring

Unfortunately, our initial assumption had a major flaw.
Since AD only gives us a composition of linear maps and linear maps are black-box functions,
the structure of the Jacobian is completely unknown.

> In other words, **we cannot tell which rows and columns form structurally orthogonal groups** without first getting our hands on a Jacobian matrix.

Author: I also wanted to highlight the fact that forming groups itself is not obvious. Let's keep this.

> In other words, **we cannot tell which rows and columns form structurally orthogonal groups** without first getting our hands on a Jacobian matrix.

Author: ```suggestion
In other words, **we cannot tell which rows and columns form structurally orthogonal groups** without first obtaining a Jacobian matrix.
```

But if we compute this Jacobian via traditional AD, then ASD isn't necessary anymore.

The solution to this problem is shown in Figure 12 (a):

> in order to find structurally orthogonal columns (or rows), we don't need to calculate every coefficient in the Jacobian.

Author: then the "full" Jacobian is equally confusing

> in order to find structurally orthogonal columns (or rows), we don't need to calculate every coefficient in the Jacobian.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in order to find structurally orthogonal columns (or rows), we don't need to calculate the Jacobian.
```
Is this better?

These steps can be much slower than a single call to the function $f$, but they are usually much faster than a full computation of the Jacobian with AD.
This makes the sparse procedure worth it even for moderately large matrices.
Additionally, if we need to compute Jacobians multiple times (for different inputs) and are able to reuse the sparsity pattern and the coloring result, 
**the cost of this prelude can be amortized** over several subsequent evaluations.

## Pattern detection

Mirroring the diversity of AD systems,
there are also many possible approaches to sparsity pattern detection,
each with its own advantages and tradeoffs.

> The work of Dixon <d-cite key="dixonAutomaticDifferentiationLarge1990"></d-cite> in the 1990's was among the first papers on this subject.
> After that, most the literature can be classified into operator overloading or source transformation techniques.

Author: ```suggestion
The work of Dixon <d-cite key="dixonAutomaticDifferentiationLarge1990"></d-cite> in the 1990's was among the first of many papers on this subject,
most of which can be classified into operator overloading or source transformation techniques.
```

> After that, most the literature can be classified into operator overloading or source transformation techniques.

Reviewer: This diff looks very weird in here.

> After that, most the literature can be classified into operator overloading or source transformation techniques.

Reviewer: <img width="850" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3f640106-7d9d-41a0-acd3-35d18f83764f">

for a specific input $\mathbf{x}$. 
These *local sparsity patterns* are strict subsets of global sparsity patterns,
and can therefore result in fewer colors.
However, they need to be recomputed when changing the input.

## Coloring

Once we have detected a sparsity pattern, our next goal is to decide **how to group the columns (or rows)** of the Jacobian.
The columns (or rows) in each group will be evaluated simultaneously using a single JVP (or VJP), with a linear combination of basis vectors called a **seed**.
If the members of the group are structurally orthogonal, then this gives all the necessary information to retrieve every nonzero coefficient of the matrix.

### Graph formulation

Luckily, this grouping problem can be reformulated as graph coloring, which is very well studied.
Let us build a graph $\mathcal{G} = (\mathcal{V}, \mathcal{E})$ with vertex set $\mathcal{V}$ and edge set $\mathcal{E}$, 
such that each column is a vertex of the graph, and two vertices are connected if and only if their respective columns share a non-zero index.
Put differently, an edge between vertices $j_1$ and $j_2$ means that columns $j_1$ and $j_2$ are not structurally orthogonal.

> There are more efficient graph representations <d-cite key="gebremedhinWhatColorYour2005"></d-cite> but here we picked the simplest one.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that there are more efficient graph representations, summed up in <d-cite key="gebremedhinWhatColorYour2005"></d-cite>.
```

A more advanced coloring technique called **bicoloring** allows combining forward and reverse modes, because the recovery of the Jacobian leverages both columns (JVPs) and rows (VJPs) <d-cite key="hossainComputingSparseJacobian1998"></d-cite> <d-cite key="colemanEfficientComputationSparse1998"></d-cite>.

Figure 19 shows bicoloring on a toy example in which no pair of columns or rows is structurally orthogonal.
Even with ASD, the Jacobian computation would require $5$ JVPs in forward-mode or $4$ VJPs in reverse mode.

> If we use both modes simultaneously, we can recover the full Jacobian by computing only $1$ JVP and $1$ VJP.

Author: So the limit is between one and 4?
Here it's easier to see the contrast if we write everything as numbers

$$ \nabla^2 f (\mathbf{x}) = J_{\nabla f}(\mathbf{x}) $$

An HVP computes the product of the Hessian matrix with a vector, which can be viewed as the JVP of the gradient function.

$$ \nabla^2 f(\mathbf{x}) (\mathbf{v}) = D[\nabla f](\mathbf{x})(\mathbf{v}) $$

Note that the gradient function is itself computed via a VJP of $f$.
Thus, the HVP approach we described stacks a JVP on top of a VJP, which justifies the name "forward over reverse".
In forward-over-reverse HVPs, the complexity of a single product scales roughly with the complexity of the function $f$ itself.
This procedure was first considered by Pearlmutter <d-cite key="pearlmutterFastExactMultiplication1994"></d-cite> and recently revisited in a 2024 ICLR blog post <d-cite key="dagreouHowComputeHessianvector2024"></d-cite>.
Note that other mode combinations are possible, like "forward over forward", which has a higher complexity but is less expensive in terms of storage.

The Hessian has a **symmetric** structure (equal to its transpose), which means that matrix-vector products and vector-matrix products coincide.

> It explains why we don't need a VHP in addition to the HVP.

Author: Nope, two propositions starting with "which" in the same sentence is a lot. Sometimes you have to accept two sentences ^^

### Necessary packages

Here are the packages we will use for this demonstration.

> We also use a few other packages for data manipulation <d-cite key="bouchet-valatDataFramesjlFlexibleFast2023"></d-cite> and visualization <d-cite key="danischMakiejlFlexibleHighperformance2021"></d-cite>.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- [SparseConnectivityTracer.jl](https://github.com/adrhill/SparseConnectivityTracer.jl) <d-cite key="hillSparseConnectivityTracerjl2024"></d-cite>: Sparsity pattern detection with operator overloading.
- [SparseMatrixColorings.jl](https://github.com/gdalle/SparseMatrixColorings.jl) <d-cite key="dalleGdalleSparseMatrixColoringsjlV04102024"></d-cite>: Greedy algorithms for colorings, decompression utilities. 
- [ForwardDiff.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ForwardDiff.jl) <d-cite key="revelsForwardModeAutomaticDifferentiation2016"></d-cite>: Forward-mode AD and computation of JVPs.
- [DifferentiationInterface.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/DifferentiationInterface.jl) <d-cite key="dalleJuliaDiffDifferentiationInterfacejlDifferentiationInterfacev06232024"></d-cite>: High-level interface bringing all of these together, originally inspired by <d-cite key="schaferAbstractDifferentiationjlBackendAgnosticDifferentiable2022"></d-cite>.

This modular pipeline comes as a replacement and extension of a previous ASD system in Julia <d-cite key="gowdaSparsityProgrammingAutomated2019"></d-cite>.

> Like in any other language, the first step is importing the dependencies.

Author: ```suggestion
We also use a few other packages for data manipulation <d-cite key="bouchet-valatDataFramesjlFlexibleFast2023"></d-cite> and visualization <d-cite key="danischMakiejlFlexibleHighperformance2021"></d-cite>.

Like in any other language, the first step is importing the dependencies.
```

2. For medium-sized inputs, sparsity handling is only useful if we can amortize the cost of detection and coloring.
3. For very large inputs, even the overhead of detection and coloring is worth paying as part of a sparse Jacobian computation.

Importantly, ASD can yield an **asymptotic speedup** compared to AD, not just a constant one.
In our test case, the cost of a JVP for `iter_diff` scales with $kn$.
Sparse differentiation requires $c$ JVPs instead of $n$, so with $c = k+1$ here its total cost scales as $\Theta(k^2 n)$ instead of $\Theta(k n^2)$.
Thus, on the log-log plot of Figure 22, the ASD curve (without detection) has a slope of $1$ while the AD curve has a slope of $2$.

Although the specific thresholds between regimes are problem-dependent, our conclusions hold in general.

## Conclusion

By now, the reader should have a better understanding of how sparsity can be used for efficient differentiation.

> But should it always be used? Of course not.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/adrhill/iclr2025-sparse-autodiff/pull/51#discussion_r1853879661.

> But should it always be used? Of course not.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Here are a list of criteria to consider when choosing between AD and ASD:

> - **Which derivative is needed?** In a purely gradient-based algorithm, sparsity will be useless: it can only speed up derivatives like the Jacobian and Hessian which have a matrix form.

Reviewer: This is not just about NN parameters, but general ASD.
A function could very well have zero-derivatives w.r.t. some inputs, especially when using ASD with local patterns, no?

> - **Which derivative is needed?** In a purely gradient-based algorithm, sparsity will be useless: it can only speed up derivatives like the Jacobian and Hessian which have a matrix form.

Author: If you're doing gradient descent and your derivatives are zero with respect to some inputs globally, then you might as well do gradient descent on a subset of the parameters. I'm not sure forward-mode gradients are relevant at all here, especially for an ML crowd

> - **Which derivative is needed?** In a purely gradient-based algorithm, sparsity will be useless: it can only speed up derivatives like the Jacobian and Hessian which have a matrix form.

Author: It's a tutorial. It does not have to be precise everywhere. In fact it's better to paint broad strokes than go into the smallest of details to ensure absolute and universal correctness.
